We're in the treasure room with Mr. Herbert Tentred, and you were just introducing me to the contents of this poem.
Why don't you just pick it up from there?
Yeah.
Well, we are here in the presence of 150 medieval manuscripts from the 10th to the 16th century, all of them complete or virtually complete.
And among them, 30 or 40 of the finest manuscripts in private hands, still in private hands.
We have here, for instance, the oldest known manuscript of one of the most important medical treatises of the Middle Ages.
And these are the Cure of Johannes Platyarius, so the ways of healing.
We need that all.
I think so.
The Curie of Johannes Platyarius.
And this is the oldest known copy.
It dates from 1180.
So it's more than 800 years old.
And what is even more important, it is not only the oldest known copy of this text, but it has also 18 miniatures in the margins.
And this makes it uniqueer than unique.
More unique.
More unique, yeah.
Because, yeah, curioser and curioser.
Because the next oldest manuscript of this text known, which has miniatures, is from 1380.
So this is the oldest surviving?
It is the oldest surviving manuscript of this text in all libraries of the world.
So do you think that the text comes to us from this copy?
Is that possible?
It may...
Very well be.
You know, I have an assistant who wrote his dissertation on this text, and he says, yeah, you can have that.
May I?
Of course.
I'd like to find out who took that.
I'd like to take a few pictures of you before I leave.
But, you know, that looks like a gorgeous photograph.
We might want to buy one of those from the photographer when the book comes out.
Perhaps, yeah, I can...
get you in contact with him.
It's a little early yet.
The book's still a couple years away.
But I mean, I can provide you with these.
I get them from him and you get them from me.
So this is just one of the 140, 150 medieval manuscripts here.
I know them quite well because yesterday and the day before and even today we did a lot of photographing about them for the new manuscripts that will be in my next catalogue, Leuch des Mittelalter, new series too, which will be out in December or so.
And so you find everything, you see.
This is a Greek synaxarion from Kosinitsa about...
This is really very, very interesting.
And the binding is from the 14th century.
And it is complete.
quite complete.
I mean, of course it has heavy stains, but this has been read every day in the monastery.
So, I mean, it is really a miracle that it should be complete.
How do you find books like this today?
Well, Mr. Bethbaines, I have to tell you that as the people, the functionaries from Schaffhausen, you, that I'm
quite renowned in my field and nearly all of them they just call me they just come tomorrow afternoon I will be offered two new manuscripts so after having established this name for 15 years now and after H.P.
Krauss who was renowned for having bought the best manuscripts over a span of 40-50 years
He's dead now for 10 years.
Well, I may say I took over.
And then I published these catalogs.
And so nearly everyone in the world who is interested in these things at least knows my name.
And he knows that I'm paying the fairest prices.
I'm paying the prices I would also be willing to pay at auction rooms.
And of course, the seller,
and the buyer are much happier not to have Sotheby's or Christie's in between.
That removes them from the equation, so to speak.
And of course, that's been a concern lately, where a lot of people have been going to Sotheby's and Christie's.
Yeah, but I mean, Sotheby's and Christie's, you know, in the last six or seven years, they had one good collection, this back
There were four or five large collections before on the market, and I bought them all.
I bought them all.
So Sollebys and Crites even thought of perhaps, well, rejoining the Western manuscript department with the book and manuscript department.
So they needed that back collection desperately.
As I told you, of the 50 manuscripts in my new catalog, about 40 I bought privately.
And this is, of course, what it is all about.
There are many manuscripts in it that have never appeared on the market.
And there are manuscripts that you would not think of still being
being available.
I mean, this is a manuscript that was never in any auction.
It was always in private.
This is by one of the finest Spanish paintings of the 50th century.
This is the so-called Greyston Master, the Master of the Greyston Prayer Book.
And this is his masterpiece.
It has 19 miniatures.
And I bought this privately
Look at these things.
So how would you describe it?
What was the name of that?
How would you describe it?
The Master of the Dresden Prayer Book.
Okay.
Dresden is that city.
I know that.
And the Master of Dresden is the very same.
Yeah, Master of Dresden, of course.
And it is him.
And he is called after that Dresden Prayer Book, which has been flooded.
in the Second World War, and is nearly destroyed now.
So this now is the finest book of ours of the Grayston master still in... still extant.
Extant, so actually better than anything that's even in a collection, you would say?
Yeah, of course, of course.
I mean, there's only the breviary of Isabella of Spain,
in the British Library that you can compare with it, with this.
But this is a breviary, and I'm talking of books of ours.
Were you ever, you don't mind my jumping around with questions, by the way, were you ever a collector of things?
Yes, of course.
I mean, everyone starts as a collector, of course.
And I'm even, I'm even planning of writing a book on collecting, you know, or a large essay or so.
because I think that I should try to give this to other people that are interested in this.
And so of course I started by collecting as a student and as an assistant at the University of Freiburg in Breisgau.
Or I can give you a nice article written on me by a Swiss journalist in which the basic facts are very well... And they're accurate.
Yeah, and they're accurate.
This is what Kant knows.
Well, people... The compliments I get on my book, I have to say, is I get my facts straight.
We'll talk at some point, and I'll go over things, and I'll ask you stupid questions like, how old are you?
Would you please spell this book?
But we have to have accuracy.
This is what counts.
on book collecting, but just on that never-to-be-destroyed feeling and emotion of the man that he has to collect.
So... Collecting at a certain level or collecting in general?
No, no, in general.
I mean, it always starts as the collecting of the three- or four-year-old boy or girl collecting stones or whatever.
and then coins, and then stamps, postage stamps, and so on.
I mean, even the sense of collecting has to be shaped, has to be evolved.
And, well, I mean, I'm doing this now for exactly 20 years.
This business, yes.
I quit university in August 1977, and then I established myself
together with my then girlfriend and afterwards my wife in Bavaria in a very remote corner of Bavaria because I had no money but I had a small collection of nice rather 20th century books
No, I had no money whatsoever.
That's important to understand.
I had no money at all.
Well, you mentioned Krauss, you mentioned Krauss, but everybody knows that.
He married to one of the wealthiest women in England.
He had a running start, at least.
And in the 50s, Honey inherited about $30 million.
With that kind of money behind me, I would have done even
even more than Kraut, I think.
But I mean... I'd like to pursue that.
You're a very confident man.
I love that, by the way.
Yeah, I'm... I love risks, you know.
You're not shy about... I run the risks.
No, no, no, no.
About, you know, you... But I started 20 years ago with no... How old started, by the way?
Last week, I was 50 years.
So I started in... with 30 years.
And I had my studies at the university, and then I was at what we call Lehrstuhl as an assistant there.
And I had a very bright future at the university.
As a teacher?
As a teacher, but romance languages, you know, literature, medieval romance literature, and so on.
So old Italian, old Provençal, old French, and so on.
I saw, after doing this for two or three years, I saw that this was not my world.
And that my sense of evolution, my sense of getting things done and getting things created, this conflicted with that sense of
being settled in the university.
So I made up my mind and said, let's do something else.
And in the beginning I wanted to start as a writer, as a poet.
And then my grandfather said, well, but you are now establishing a family and will have children and so on.
Don't you think, well, I appreciate your
I said, don't you think you should have something to live on?
And though my grandparents were not poor, but of course they knew that it is always better to help someone to earn his own money than to just give him the money.
And I said, yes, I think you're right.
As books and literature were my whole life, even then, they are more my whole life now, but even then, I thought that they were more.
And, of course, dealing with books.
But even then I was dedicated to books, to literature, the whole .
And books.
And I like fine books.
I always liked fine books.
Define fine.
Yeah, yeah.
Define fine for me, if you would.
What to you is a fine book?
Well, I mean... As Justice Holmes said, somebody asked of Justice of the Supreme Court, how do you know what pornography is?
You know it when you see it.
And I wonder if it's the same thing that applies to a fine book.
But I mean, there are really refinements in defining a fine book, so to say.
And I will, afterwards, I give you a nice
a nice proof of it.
Okay.
This is very interesting.
I've never explored this with anyone.
Yeah, yeah.
And this really is my field.
I can tell you.
This is my field.
I know that.
If you look around, I mean, here you have 150 medieval manuscripts.
No one, I mean, the whole market of medieval manuscripts
one-leaf miniatures, but of whole or virtually complete manuscripts.
The whole market only consists of two hundred?
Yeah, of two hundred thirty, two hundred forty manuscripts.
But they haven't got more than fifteen manuscripts any longer.
They don't have... I saw them when I was there last year, and they have from twelve to fifteen manuscripts.
And I have two hundred.
Of the two hundred and forty.
And why not?
I mean, I'm enjoying that, as long as I can afford it, of course.
I mean, I have to sell.
But there are also about 80 very fine incunabula, but very fine things, you know, not only incunabula printed before 15 of you.
It's an incanabulum like that.
It's a very important point because most incanabulum is junk.
It just happens to be old.
I would never lay my hand on a normal incanabulum.
But this, for instance, is some sort of extraordinary.
This is printed on vellum.
So it's not paper, but it's vellum.
And of course, this is the
The Grazianos of Peter Schoeffer, who was the successor to Gutenberg.
Peter Schoeffer, yes, successor to Gutenberg.
And it has 38 miniatures painted in by the house bookmaster.
Perhaps you know what the house is.
And this is one of two printed books in which we know that the house bookmaster was involved.
How do we know this?
My technique?
Yeah.
My best friend and the one who writes my manuscript catalogs is Eberhard Koenig.
He's a professor at the Free University of Berlin, and he's one of the foremost authorities.
You have to spell his name for me.
Koenig.
It's K-O-E-N-I-G.
And his first name?
Eberhard.
Eberhard Koenig.
And he's one of the foremost authorities on book paintings.
in the 15th century, and he had established this without any doubt.
And there are 38... Look at the condition of this.
There are 38 miniatures in it.
Now, was that supposed to be a miniature of the... This is a miniature.
I know, but you just went by a page that had a blank splat.
This is an illumination.
Illumination because solid gold is in it.
This is illumination, this is illumination,
This is just rubrication, the red and blue lumbar.
And this is the miniature.
And what do we call this book again?
This is Grazianus.
How is this book?
The Decretum of Grazianus.
G-R-A-T-E-A-N-U-S.
Grazianus.
And he's the founder of the ecclesiastical
justice, you know.
Decretum.
D-E-C-R-E-T-U-M.
The Decretum.
That's what you call this book.
Yeah, this is the book.
And this was printed where?
In Mainz.
1472.
And you said Schaeffer was the printer, right?
Schaeffer, yeah.
Peter Schaeffer was the printer.
Look, you see here, it's very famous.
Printing marks.
And you see here, Petrus Schaeffer, the longtime Continental Cutis.
And here you see, Anno Incarnationis Dominici.
1,472.
Wow.
That's touching something.
He's one of the patron saints of printing.
His fingerprints are just right.
This is one of the finest books.
This is one of three copies in the world.
The others are in Munich, in the Bavarian State Library, and in Wolfsburg.
This is one of the three copies on vellum that have been extensively illuminated, you know?
All the others have only the first page painted in, but none of the 60 known copies has all the miniatures painted in, except the Munich, the Wolkenbüttel, and my copy.
And my, one can say, is the finest of them all, because
The Munich and the Wolfenbüttel copies have not this illumination.
Where's Wolfenbüttel?
Wolfenbüttel is near Hanover.
Hanover.
So the Herzog August Bibliothek in Wolfenbüttel.
It's very important.
Look here.
And the state of preservation... Does this come out of a private collection?
I mean, without asking... Yeah, yeah.
Without probing.
It's a private collection, yeah.
In northern Europe, yeah.
Do you expect something like this to go into the hands of a private individual or to an institution?
Always.
No, I'm always selling to private individuals.
I'm nearly never selling to libraries.
And is that a matter of, well, I mean, I have been asked that very often, many times.
And I think it is also a sort of prejudice on my side, you know.
I like to sell to private individuals because I can buy them back, you know, sometimes.
And I think maybe that's a statement you might want to make.
Everything you sell, you would probably be unreservedly willing to buy back.
Yes, of course, of course.
I mean, these things, without a doubt.
So here you have Incarnabula, this one, but I show you another one which is
nearly as fine as this one.
This is the first printed book on architecture ever.
This is Leone Battista Alberchi, the re-edificatoria 1485.
I mean, this is the first book ever written on architecture.
So this is the founding, the cornerstone of architectural books.
But look at the copy.
The binding is a Venetian binding modeled on the Oriental Mudeja bindings.
And the book itself is quite nice.
This is the book, this is the copy of Perfex Murray, the very famous, and Hippolyte Detailleur.
So, I mean, it has also the finest imaginable provenance.
So all the things everybody says that are important, they are important.
Provenance, condition.
This is, this is, this.
The condition is perhaps the most important of all.
Because, I mean, let's take the Schädel chronicle, the Nuremberg Chronicle.
Schädel.
I mean, you can have .
.
There are lots of them.
Ah, you can have .
.
I at least had 20 of them.
But, uh, um, a normal, say, a normal copy
of the Schädel costs now, well, $30,000 to $35,000 or so, a normal good complete copy.
But a very fine colored copy in very fine condition may cost 20 times that or 30 times that.
It may cost a million.
I mean, the sky is the limit in this case.
And it's always depending on condition and...
and on completeness of course and on provenance and so on because I mean these things are entwined provenance an important provenance can tell us this must have been someone who was able to to afford these things which were as
expensive then, as they are now.
I mean, I show you another book.
This is the first travel book printed, and it's the very, very famous Breidenbach, 1486, also painted, also printed by Schaeffer.
The Breidenbach that travels to the Holy Land.
But look at that copy.
I mean, have you ever seen a copy from 1486 in this condition?
And it has all those folding.
That paper almost looks like it's been bleached.
No, no, not at all.
And look at the condition of it.
Nein, Herr Kortes.
Vielen Dank.
Ja, Ihnen auch.
Look at that.
I mean, this, of course, is the first one.
It's the Travel to the Holy Land.
Or Journey to the Holy Land.
By Bernard Breidenbach.
But look at that copy.
It's unbelievable.
And as it is in its original binding, you see, this is the original binding.
One woodcut, which is always cut into, is not touched.
This one, you know?
What do you mean cut into?
Cut into would say that the binder cut it off here.
But as this is
this has its full margins, you know, it had not to be trimmed.
So, I mean, this is really something that even I do not see every day.
But you have to imagine here every incunable is of that quality and of that kind.
For instance, this one
This is the second book on military things.
But it is illuminated in the workshop of Liberale da Verona.
Look at that.
It's been printed in Verona in 1483.
Look here.
Verona Impressum Domini, 1483, the 13th of February.
And it has then been illuminated in the workshop of Liberale da Verona.
Liberale da Verona.
He's a very, very important book illuminated.
But he must have... I can find all these people.
Of course.
And by the way, I mean, most of these books that I'm now showing you will be contained in my two catalogs.
And I send you these two catalogs.
So you have all the... I think this will save me a lot of work.
Of course.
I mean, and if you just need whatever it is, just let me know.
I'll send it back by fax or by letter.
Look at that.
And this is a quality of illumination that you don't find normally.
And it is only understandable because it was a manuscript illuminator who did this.
So I'm just showing you two or three... And this is all material that you are preparing to include in your new catalog.
And when that catalog comes out, generally speaking, that will have, you said, 50...
50 unique printed books and another 50 medieval manuscripts.
Okay.
How quickly do you think the contents of that catalog would sell?
Well, it always takes two, three, four years.
But sometimes I sell them within one month or so, you know.
I published a very, very, well, I think a very important catalog on botany and zoology, so natural history.
And I've never done this before, you know.
And it was a catalog like that, with 200 collar plates and so on.
And they were very, very expensive, the books.
But I sold at least the botanical section, I sold out within two months.
And there were books in it, like the Basler,
You know, perhaps that... My God, look at this binding.
I haven't even seen that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
This is Marius Michel, and this is a very important binding, and it will be in my new catalog, 50 unique books, because of the combination of this binding with the first printing of Goya, four proverbios that got lost in 1828, and
have been printed here for the first time.
And this is one of the five copies you see here.
This is one of five copies.
Oh, God, look at that.
Five copies printed on old Japan paper with four proofs of each of the four proverbios.
You see this?
This is printed on vellum.
Here, on vellum.
And there are only five...
copies of them.
And this is on old Japanese paper, and this is on Watman paper.
This is an etat that is not known to Harris, the great bibliographer.
And this is the known.
This occurs in sales, but these never, because only five of them exist.
So why are there identical prints?
in the same book.
I've never seen such a thing.
Well, this is a sign of the Editions Deluxe, you know, Deluxe Edition.
So they printed the identical plate four times on four different media, different papers.
Or in this case, even on vellum, so on parchment.
So this is parchment,
This is Japanese paper.
This is Watman paper.
And the date on this, this volume?
This is 1877.
1877.
Paris and London.
Yeah.
And you know there are only five copies of this Edition de Luxe.
But this is the only copy, it was Prince Demidov's copy, that has also been bound like this by Marius Michel.
Well, do you get a kick out of it?
Of course.
Well, you know, I mean, you have to combine the kick and a sort of racial, a sort of... Well, you are a professional.
Yeah, of course.
But I still get those kicks, you know.
I mean, seeing a book like that, I mean, this is the finest...
A book on wrestling.
And the first book on wrestling ever published.
So you could do a catalog just on first books, couldn't you?
Oh, of course I mean.
I mean, you've had five or six different first books in the last 15 minutes.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
First architecture, first wrestling, first... This is the Editio Princip of Tacitus, you know?
Venice, 1471.
And this has not occurred on the market since 140 years.
I mean, I could make the most marvelous catalog on these things.
But this is also very interesting.
It's the first book on wrestling, and it has 87 woodcuts by Lukas Kranach.
Lukas Kranach.
C-R-A-N-A-C-H.
Lukas Kranach, the great painter.
Lukas Kranach of Leibniz.
And this is the only copy known...
of all those that are still known in the original coloring.
Look, look here.
It's 1539.
All the others are black and white.
So this is really very, very important, this book.
How do you price these things?
I'm not asking for specific numbers.
Well, I mean... How do you determine... Normally I know what I paid for them.
But really it depends on how I cherish them, of course.
I mean, a book that is really close to my heart will be dearer, more expensive than a book that occurs from time to time and...
that you see also in other catalogs, of course.
But here are only books that you never see.
Look at that.
These are just lying around.
Yeah, they're just lying around.
I mean, it's like they're thick on the ground.
These are also very, very interesting things.
Manuscripts there.
This is a manuscript from Parma.
1280, look at the binding.
And this comes from a very famous collection, a collection of André Hachette, the famous French editor.
And here you have inscriptions from the De Rossi family, which was the most important family in Parma.
in that time for two or three hundred years, and there are 20 or 30 miniatures and pages like that.
Do you mind if I go get my camera?
These aren't for publication, but they do help me when I'm writing, if I get a sense of... Do you mind if I shoot a few pictures in here with you?
No, but I think it's better to do it tomorrow.
Okay.
Because, I mean, we just get a sense now...
and tomorrow will be easier and of course I can provide you with something for publication would be wonderful but also I like to have I like visual you have books from the 17th so this is chronologically arranged here you have books from the 17th and the 18th century and there are things that are at least as important as these ones
because most of those books contain the original drawings.
Not only the illustrations, but the original drawings, you know.
I show you one in one.
And this represents... Do you have things in here from the full range of your 20 years as a bookseller?
Well, not quite so.
Of course, most of the more humble things that I...
in the first five or ten years, they are sold.
Of course, most of these come from the last five to ten years.
And I now show you the difference between a fine and a very fine copy, an attention copy.
A attention copy?
Yeah, this is a attention copy, yeah.
You know, Bernard Breslauer published his large catalog, 110,
And when a colleague asked him why he did it so marvelously, so exuberantly, he said that he wanted to out-tenture it.
But he did not succeed.
That's a phrase that I will use.
You can count on that.
Certain things have a resonance when you hear them immediately.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
He wanted to out-tenture it because he knew my manuscript.
You see, this is the very famous
book connoisseur on the left on ten it was traded with 20 with 20 um engravings after Fragonard the the the paint after honori Fragonard you see here the famous um avanti edition it out on a way Fragonard so this is a a nice book and this is a good copy but I wouldn't call it a fine copy because uh it is only what
can be expected.
It is in a good Morocco binding.
And the year of it is what?
What's the year of publication?
1795.
1795, yeah.
Two findings.
Yeah, two findings.
Findings are nice.
It's the great Morocco of the time.
So this is quite a nice copy.
But a fine copy is this one, which will also be in my new catalog.
Unique Books.
And this is really now, now be prepared, so to say.
This is Le Veuve de Montgermans copy.
We just make a comparison.
Look here.
Here we have this
not the finished state, but the state before the finished state with the text.
So this is what we call avant la lettre, but with the names of the artists.
Just to show you, this copy is one of the three copies to contain most of the plates in different states in the world.
It has 82 plates
different states of these 20 engravings you see but it does not even have the last state before the last it starts with the third last state here without the names of the of the artist and then with the pure etching
And then with a unique copy of this in contresence.
You see, here he comes from the right, and here he comes from the left.
So this they tried just for... This is just an artist's proof.
It's a practice proof.
Exactly, and it's known only in this copy.
But now comes what makes this copy really unique.
So this is very nice here.
This is very nice.
This is the tensioned copy.
This is the tensioned copy because here you have eight original drawings by Fragonard.
All of them signed.
You see Fragonard.
This is tensioned copy.
Here you have the original.
Just for the sake of my tape.
The territory drawing.
Look here.
And look how tiny it is.
I mean.
This was the original drawing by Fragonard for the engraver.
But only these two have been engraved.
This is not a book, but this is the original art.
This is original art, but I joined these two.
And the combination of the two of them makes this... So you would offer this with this, is that right?
Together.
With this too?
No.
This adds nothing, so to say.
But these two, the combination of these two, this unique copy in itself, together with the eight original drawings of Fragonard, this is the finest thing you can imagine of the 18th century in France.
And they had lots of fine things.
There it is right there.
And you have to imagine that in this new catalog, 50 unique books, there will be 20
books like that, with the original law.
When are you publishing this, when?
In November or December.
I'll remind you, please.
No, no, no, I sent it to you, of course.
I just showed Mr. Bass Baines the difference between a nice and a very fine copy.
And a trenchard copy.
So these are 18th century things
Tomorrow we have a second and a third look on them.
There are very, very fine things there.
Well, for instance, this is also an attention copy, one can say.
This is Solomon Gessner.
Three volumes.
I only show you one.
And 12 copies had... The normal edition is like that.
It's a quarto.
And 12 copies have been struck off.
in large folio.
But this is not only one of the twelve copies in large folio, but it has all the 148 original drawings by Le Dauquier for the engravings.
And so proud was he of this book, and I mean he can be proud, that some of the originals he even colored, I show you one or two of them,
He colored them in watercolor.
Where are they?
Oh, my.
148.
And look how well the watercolors are still.
And how fine they are, yeah.
148.
And so proud, as I said, was he that he also inserted a self-portrait.
exists, of course, in this copy.
Le Barbier.
B-I-E-R.
J-A-J-F.
You see here, auteur de tous les dessins des œuvres de Salomon Gessner, son ami.
And it took him 14 years.
And is that the title there?
Is that the title underneath?
No, this is only... No, I mean into that tissue there.
This is the dedication, the dedication to the conquest of Jean Lys.
So the title of this is Oeuvre, is that said here?
The works of Salomon Gessner, Oeuvre de Salomon Gessner.
There's a good book on French 18th century illustrated books by Gordon Ray, published in the Morgan Library series.
Perhaps I can get you a copy of this, because it's sold out, but perhaps I can get you a copy of this.
I can read it.
So it's Gordon Ray, it's called Le Livre et Libre Stratteur.
I don't have it at the library, I do my research.
And this is bound by the foremost bookbinder of the day, Relié par Beaus et Rien.
So I mean, this is what I like, you know.
Oh, you know that very nice book, Daphnis et Chloé, from 1718.
Look here.
This is a normal but very fine copy of the first edition of 1718.
Les Amours Pastoral with 28 engravings after the tableau of the Réjean.
very nice things, and a very treasured book.
Look here.
It's very nice.
But this is bound by Padelu, and it's one of his finest bindings.
Here is another copy of the same book.
Look here.
Bound like that.
And here's another copy of the engravings, but not folded, you see, on heavy paper, not folded.
Now, is this a scarce book, per se, or are these copies?
No, it's not very scarce.
But it's these copies.
These are all unfindable, because they all... But look at that.
I mean, this is a... They're all unfindable, except that you found them.
Yeah, yeah.
This is a new edition of 1957 with the original engravings, but in new surroundings, in new frames, and with some vignettes by Charles Eisen.
This is in a very fine binding.
And here you have the unique copy of that edition, in which not only all... You have all of the... You have them in two states, one without the frame, and then with the frame, but colored in such a marvelous way.
And it comes from the finest American libraries in this.
private libraries in this century, Robert Ho and Colton Field Bishop.
I mean, these are the—but look at that.
One really has to look at that.
And who is Blotner?
Huh?
Blotner?
I don't know.
But they also call it the very, very fine— Look here.
Ho had a lot of his books bound.
Was that bound?
for Holt.
Robert Holt had a lot of his books.
No, no, this is the original binding.
So he didn't, thank goodness.
Bound by Dahmen in Amsterdam.
Because he did that to a lot of books.
Yeah, yeah, of course.
He had them bound mostly in, in... It was a red, I think, kind of a red.
In France, in France.
Yeah, yeah.
And, uh, I just, just wanted to show you some of the opposite glory that, that I have.
And this has been done for the first
director of the Royal Library, and he didn't want this book that small, so he had every page or every folio re-emerged to a quarter size, inlaid to a quarter size, and so he had a quarto instead of a small octavo.
isn't that I mean and it has been done in the time in 1720 and and this is you show me this is only Daphnis and Chloé and it's only a part of what I have this is the finest thing look look here it's printed on parchment this is not paper this is parchment and it has has all the original drawings
And it has all the original gouache.
Now, who bound that?
Not the artist, of course.
No, no, this was bound by Lorty.
But, I mean, he didn't bind it himself, but was it for himself, or was it for... No, no, no, it was for a very renowned collector named Gancia in 1860.
But the book itself had been assembled by Renoir, the great...
editor and even greater bibliophile in the last years of the 18th century.
Look at that, I mean.
Jeez.
And you see, I mean, these were prepared for a quarter edition.
So this is the only folio, only copy in folio, printed in folio, on vellum, and with all the original drawings and with the original gouaches inlaid to size.
because it was only prepared for a quarter.
Yeah, because you're not afraid to handle these books.
You're not afraid to handle these books.
No, no, no, no.
I mean, I'm quite accustomed to that.
Yeah, but I mean, you're not intimidated by the prospect of bruising them or something like that.
No, no, no.
To the contrary.
I think these, even these finest books of all,
were destined to be read.
And you can read them, you know?
I mean, you can read the medieval manuscripts, and it does not any harm to them.
And you can read these, and they are, after having been read by 20 attentive, by 20 careful readers, of course not readers who throw them away, but after having been read by... Respectful readers.
Respectful readers.
They are exactly...
in the same immaculate state as before.
That's an interesting point, don't you think?
I mean, of course, of course.
You're picking up this book, and you're not being delicate.
No, no, no, not at all.
I'm not suggesting that you're not being cautious either, but I'm just saying that, you know, they want us to treat them
the way they have been treated over the last two or three hundred years.
And books are meant to be read.
Yes, of course.
Or at least to be looked at, to be bruised.
In a general way, when you sell a book, when you place a book of this quality with somebody, is the expectation that the person who buys it is going to enjoy it physically?
Yes.
Or does it become a museum piece?
This is very important for me.
It is very important.
And I have been asked this for many times.
Don't you think that you are too negligent with the books and so on?
For you?
Yeah, because, I mean, these are my books and I know them very well.
And no book in the... 160,000 or 180,000 books that I have handled and still have got worse in my life.
Lots of books really were saved by me, I have to tell that, because, you know, books printed on vellum or books written on vellum, on parchment, if they are kept in overheated rooms, I mean, the parchment begins to wrinkle, no, to wrinkle.
and perhaps even to crack, but to wrinkle.
And if you have paintings on that vellum, of course the color comes off.
So sometimes I bought things only to preserve them from being destroyed.
Now when you place them in the hands of a private individual, you're fairly certain that these people are going to treat them with the same
I'm pretty sure, I'm pretty sure.
They are, I think 99% are even much more careful than I am, but I know these books, and I have handled them dozens and hundreds of times, so I know them very well, and I can handle them quickly and in a very efficient way, and of course private individuals
They cherish them.
They love them.
And, of course, they don't have so many as I have.
The people that you, who are your clients, are they a vanishing breed of collector, do you think?
Or is this still very much, you know, as we approach the next millennium, is the person who... This is, of course, an essential question.
And I think that they will never vanish.
I think they will never vanish because, you know... The people, you mean.
The people, the collecting people will never vanish.
At this level, too.
Especially at this level.
Because more and more, even people collecting art recognize that these kinds of books, these kinds of books, that they are an art inventor.
You know, the difference between books that just are read and then thrown away and books from the 10th, the 11th until the 20th century.
I mean, here you have Leger or Chagall or whatever, Picasso.
This difference gets wider and wider.
And the books that deserve to be called art, pieces of art, works of art, they will get...
more valuable, and there will always be more people who really like to collect and like to know more about these goods.
And as I'm only dealing with, say, a minimal fraction of all those that can be interested, I mean, only with 10 or 20 in the world,
No, perhaps 30 in the world.
People?
These people, these 30 are… Did you say that's your basic client base in about 30 people?
Yeah, yeah.
Really?
And these 30 people will always exist, you know.
If one dies, there will be another, or two others.
And I do not do much for, you know, publicity or something.
You don't need it.
No.
those who see my catalogs they know that they can rely on me and that it is worth buying books with me and this is the only thing that counts well just to to finish that tour and then we go to the restaurant these are books from the botanical and the zoological sections you see those nine red books there this is the finest book on birds
ever published in the 18th century, Buffon, the birds of Buffon.
And this is the copy of the Tsar, Alexander III, and his wife, Maria Parlovna, illuminated in a very special way.
You have to imagine that of this large folio edition of Buffon, only about 15 to 20 copies have been struck off.
And there you have two of them.
The ones over there that are copied is also one of the 20.
This contains 14 original watercolors.
And there you have fine atlases and so on.
There are 16 volumes of original watercolors.
4,000 original watercolors of botanical, of flowers.
I wonder.
No, no, no.
Because that's the kind of book he would have had.
Yeah, of course, of course.
If he had known, he would have bought this.
Look at that.
I mean, there are 4,000 watercolors.
Not 20.
Watercolors?
No, watercolors.
4,000.
These 16...
In terms of rarity, does this stack up with the Audubon?
Well, this is much rarer, because, I mean, the Audubon, this exists in 20 or 25 or 30 copies, and this is unique.
I mean, this is per definition, unique, because it has never been printed, you know.
It's the original watercolor, 4,000 of them.
And his name again, I should write that down.
H-A-P-P-E.
Double P-E.
And Summa Botanica.
Summa Botanica.
Here's the finest copy of Piranesi sold in this century.
Look at how tall they are.
Look here, here, here, and here.
There's about four feet.
It's like the Odebon, the elephant, double elephant folio.
And these are 27 volumes with 1,256 engravings of the finest quality you can imagine.
Do you ever sell any American books?
Probably not.
Well, I just, well, I mean, this is not an American book.
I just sold the Maximilian Witt zu Neu Witt, the very famous, with the Bodmer lithographs, you know, a very fine copy.
And of course I have some.
But, I mean, there are so many dealers who are
exclusively dealing in Americana that I should not intrude, so to say.
But of all the other things, I think I have the finest copy.
This is the finest copy of Watteau, the whole work of Watteau in four volumes.
I've never been in a room like this.
No, no, no, and you never will.
Look here, this is the gold, the birth of Australia, birth of Asia.
What a copy.
So this is at least an English book.
Look here.
Oh, my God, look at those.
580 colored lithographs, hand-colored lithographs.
I love that.
And, yeah, and the copy is... Oh, my God.
Brilliant.
And it has 560 or 580 of the Kingfisher.
By the way, we have Kingfisher's here.
We have those birds here.
Magnificent.
And the copy is mint.
Original binding, all seven volumes of the
And then I buy it, or try to buy it.
I always like to think I know, and I never do, how a chapter or how something starts and how it ends.
I don't know yet, but right off the bat I'm thinking I could
I've never been in a room like this in my life, and your answer is, hey, you never will.
You never will again.
You know, I get visits from my colleagues and so on, and they write me, may I visit you?
I just received a card from Simon Finch, whom perhaps you know.
He's one of the leading booksellers in London, and he said,
Last time I thought about it, and it's very curious that I've never visited the most important bookseller of my time.
And I said, well, this is very flattering, but come and see some of my books, and then perhaps you will even discover that you were right.